From Hansel minutes.com it's Hansel
minutes, a weekly discussion with
web developer and technologist Scott
Hanselman posted by Carl Franklin. This
is Lawrence Ryan announcing show number
one Oh three. Recorded live
Wednesday, March 5th, 2008. Support for Hanselman
it's just provided by Tellerik
rad controls, but most comprehensive
suite of components for windows
forms and asp.net web applications.
online@wwwdottelerik.com. Support is also provided
by.net developers journal the world's
leading.net developer magazine online at
www dot  dot com.
In this episode, Scott talks
with keto Bradley on Microsoft
developer on the connected systems
architecture team about testing after
unit tests. Hi, this is
Scott Hanselman and this is
another episode of Hansel minutes
and I'm sitting here in
building 42 on the Microsoft
campus. And I'm sitting down
with Kitchell Bradley a developer
on the connected systems architecture
team. Hello, thanks for taking
the time. I was given
your name by Chris cells
who just raved about some
of the stuff that you
were doing internally and said
that you gave a presentation
on testing after unit tests.
And I saw this and
immediately said, okay, I've got
to come and hang out
with this guy. So now
that I'm up visiting in
Redmond, I'm happy to be
able to sit down and
chat with you. Now I've
worked on systems that have
done testing and unit testing
and code coverage. So I
thought I pretty much had
a handle on that, but
you've got some ideas that
indicate that maybe I'm not
as prepared as I thought
I was. Well, yes, I
guess most people are familiar
with a unit testing and
a common metric when you
are writing unit tests to
know that you have sufficient
tests is code coverage. And
so oftentimes a goal will
be 80% code coverage that
says that your tests hit
80% of the lines of
code, you know, essentially in
your product. And ideally of
course you would hope to
get a hundred percent, but
if you have a hundred
percent code coverage, does this
mean that you're done testing,
you can ship your product
and your customers and your
customers will be delighted. And
I think the answer typically
is no. So then the
question becomes, when are you
done testing and how much
testing do you need to
do and how do you
know what tests you should
do and whether they're sufficient.
So if I had a,
a method that, you know,
took a Boolean and I
have an if statement inside
it, if this else that
I've got two branches and
I might run a, a
complexity analysis and do a
cyclometic complexion, and it would
tell me that there's two
ways to get through that
method. I then maybe write
two tests. I'd say that
I had a hundred percent
code coverage. And I'm feeling
at this point, pretty good
about my code, right? But
maybe you shouldn't be. One
of the things is, is
that code coverage can't measure
the coverage of code that's
not there. And so for
example, your function may be
missing error checking. If you
pass an old parameter to
there, and that is the
reference, you're gonna get a
crash. You're a hundred percent
code coverage. Won't detect that
kind of condition. Even if
you do have all of
your error checking and all
of the code is in
fact present, and you still
have a hundred percent code
coverage. Th the data itself
is what is going to
determine the behavior of the
function and that isn't measured
by code coverage. But code
coverage does tell you something
really important code coverage tells
you what code you have
not tested is a negative
metric, but we tend to
think of it as a
positive metric. So if you
have code coverage, it tells
you that it's possible for
that code to execute correctly,
at least in your test.
But it doesn't mean it's
going to work correctly for
a customer. On the other
hand, if there's a bit
of code that has no
code coverage, you know, that
you haven't tested it. And
so, you know that you
don't know whether it works
or not. Okay. So you
decided to say this again
and to make sure that
this got, cause I'm drilling
this into my own brain
at the same time, as
we're drilling it into the
listeners. Yes. By doing code
coverage, I determined that it
is possible for that code
that I've covered to run
properly. It's possible. It's not
that it ran properly. It
ran properly in this instance.
Right. But there is other
parallel universes that it very,
very likely will. Well, yeah,
I think I can give
another example, maybe an analogy
that would make it easier
to understand, and which is
suppose that you are going
to test the, the road
system in the state. Right.
And so you know about
all the roads, there's little
roads, there's driveways, there's freeways,
there's highways, and you take
your little three cylinder hatchback
and you drive it down.
Every single road, take a
small car drive everywhere. Absolutely.
And you may find that
you're successful, or maybe you
run into a power line
over the road. You need
to know what you need
to remove that. Or maybe
there's a bridge that hasn't
been built yet. So you
discover those things. You fix
them, you've got a hundred
percent road coverage and you
feel pretty satisfied. Then you
say you open up the
roads and you let people
go and drive on them.
And maybe the first thing
that happens is that a
double Decker bus gets onto
the freeway and runs into
an overpass crashes into it.
And so I think that
it wasn't really sufficient to
test every road. You also
needed to know what kind
of vehicles were going to
be traveling on them. Maybe
your three cylinder vehicle was
always going slow. And when
a, you know, an eight
cylinder Jaguar turns the corner,
it goes flying off the
road, cause it's going a
hundred miles an hour. And,
and the speed limit sign
was 120, maybe even. So
if we wanted to test
the highway system very effectively,
it may be that we
do want to sand a
slow car and a small
vehicle down every single road
find the roads aren't finished,
et cetera. But the way
to get the most effective
results would be to take
a large variety of vehicles
with different capabilities and sizes
and shapes as speeds, perhaps
drivers and send them down
every road. But the problem
then is it may be
that we don't have the
time or the resources to
send so many vehicles down
every single road in the
state. You could imagine that
might even take years to
complete. So we need to
prioritize, right. And this was
about mapping requirements to testing.
Absolutely. So the not every
road is equally important. You
know, so if the freeway
is used by the, by
much more people than my
driveway. And so a flaw
in my driveway is going
to inconvenience me and my
immediate neighbors, a flaw on
the freeway is can, you
know, cripple the transportation system
for the entire state. And
a similar thing comes up
in software. Although we might
not think about it. You
know, I had this experience
with a piece of code
that I was writing some
tests for. It didn't have
any tests yet. So at
0% code coverage, and I
wrote one test case, not
even a test, but just
a test case. And then
I measured the code coverage
and I had 37% or
something like that. And I
was pretty pleased. That's a
lot of code coverage from
one single test. Right. It
was just a small bit
of code. No, it wasn't
that big. So a driver
actually. Okay. So you went
through a lot, you bounced
around inside that driver for
quite a while, by that
one test case. Absolutely. I
sent an IO request to
a driver and the, you
know, the, it was handled
by the entry point and
then it was passed to
another function and another function
that was that, you know,
it's, the air checking was
invoked and et cetera. And
it went all the way
down to the bottom and
then came back up. So
it actually hit quite a
bit of code. And so
I then wrote a second
test case and the second
test case now my code
coverage is like 45%. It's
like great. A third test
case. My code coverage is
like 50%. Okay. Fourth test
case. It was 51% kind
of asked them topically approach.
Exactly. And then 51 and
a half percent then, you
know, so getting to 50%
was incredibly easy, but getting
to 70% is very hard.
But the part that really
surprised me is that I
ran my second test case
by itself measured the code
coverage. And it was about
37 or 38% interesting. In
other words, every test case
was hitting a whole bunch
of the code. Exactly the
same code every time. Right.
And then there was a
little bit of, of, you
know, sort of the, the
side paths. So you've got
a lot of, you know,
imagining this Venn diagram of
all the code that you're
covering and I'm seeing huge
chunks of intersection. Yes. And
then you're getting little bits
that are specific to a
test case that are letting
you get that extra percent
or too sure. I think
I'd go back to the
highway analogy and there's part
of your code. This is
like the freeway. And if
you're going to go anywhere,
you pretty much have to
get on the freeway, get
to close to your destination.
Then you get off and
go on some side roads.
If you have a different
destination, say different test case,
you're still going to get
on the freeway and drive
down all of that freeway
road, but then you'll take
a different exit and there'll
be a little bit that
is different. Right, right. And
so that freeway is the
easiest code to hit, but
it's also the most important
code because any flaw there
is going to be impactful
to your customers. The, the
there's some little corner of
the code that takes a
real special test case to
get to it. It may
be that very few people
will be impacted by flaws
there. So even if you
do miss it, it's going
to have the least cost.
And so if you have
a set amount of time
in order to do your
testing now, absolutely you would
like to have breadth coverage,
which is make sure that
all the parts of your
code can function. But when
you're putting the extra effort
in, you would want to
have a more diversity of
data and more scenarios around
that highway, which is the
most impactful. Right. So how
do you figure that out?
I mean, is that about
using a profiler and then
spending time seeing where we're
heading through our, basically running
a test case with coverage
and using coverage, not as
a number to make you
feel better about your testing,
but rather as a number
to know where in your
code you're exploring. Yeah. You
can use the coverage to
know in terms of breadth,
what parts of the code
you haven't touched yet, but
it doesn't give you any
information about depth now about
knowing where the highway is.
Well, the answer is, however,
your customers are gonna use
the code. That's the important
code and that's the important
paths. So this is where
it does come back to
requirements. And so one of
the, it is a little
bit harder because sometimes people
use the code in ways
that we don't necessarily anticipate,
but it to the degree
that we can emulate the
customers when we're testing, that's
where we can go beyond
unit testing and create tests
that are going to be
more effective. So for example,
I've worked on a lot
of frameworks and with frameworks,
customers are developers, the developers
is going to write a
program and he's going to
use the framework and excellent,
excellent way to test this
is to create a sample.
A sample is the process
of writing a program, exactly
like the customer's going to
do it and you'll run
into issues, usability or awkwardness
or discoverability. That's kind of
nice. But in addition, when
your sample is done, you
should execute it as part
of your test passes, because
any flaws that are uncovered
as a result of running
the sample are very likely
to be exactly the flaws
that the customers are likely
to run. In. First, in
other words, there's most serious
day, one kind of bug,
You know, and it seems
obvious that if you're writing
a framework, you need to
use it. And I've written
frameworks before, and I've worked
at companies where we've written
frameworks and some of the
early versions where basically things
went horribly wrong. We're when
we didn't come at it
from the outside in, we
didn't put ourselves in the
shoes of the, of the
developer who would be using
it. So we didn't write
samples. And more importantly, our
test cases didn't look like
samples. They didn't reflect the
reality of the use of
that framework. So I can
definitely relate to having code
coverage numbers. That look right.
But in reality, I wasn't
protected. Yes. And so again,
the unit tests don't look
like samples, but they're important
for the purpose. Cause they
give you that breadth to
get to 80% code coverage,
just with samples would be
really difficult because again, like
each additional sample, which is
costly is going to give
you an additional 0.1%, maybe.
So you have your unit
test for the breath. Then
you create samples for the
depth and the, and the
samples. Aren't going to go
on every byway they're going
to be going down that
main highway of the code
right now, if you're not
creating a framework, there's still
approaches that you can take.
And the general and mentality
is a route as around
the same code. I'm executing
over and over again with
variations, of course, but mostly
the same code, but it's
the diversity of data. That's
what, that's what customers bring
to software that we don't
have when we're executing an
owner. Developer machines is they
have their own data. It's
bigger, it's stranger is less
consistent. They create it in
ways we didn't anticipate their
environments. Aren't exactly the same
or developer machines can be
top notch. Maybe they have
our short on memory and
Ram on their computer and
that can have an impact.
So it's all of those
differences that make it likely
they'll run into issues that
we we don't know about
in advance. So to create
a really interesting test, maybe
it's a very simple test,
but maybe it has a
huge variety of data. And
you can, that you can
put into it. You can
write tests that generate data
on the fly, or maybe
you have a pile of
it lying around. So it
seems like that when I'm
thinking about terms of generating
data, there's generating data from
the customer yes. Where you
can basically make your application
phone home, kind of the
windows error recovery, dr. Watson
way of doing things. I
mean, that's, that's free data.
If someone's going to hit
send information, that's good stuff.
We can use that. Absolutely.
You should use that. And
certainly if you have such
data, you should use it
to find out what is
the kind of problems that
are occurring and find out
why your testing isn't discovering
that. And that'll inform about
what kind of tests you
need that you might not
have. And well, one way
to get data for putting
in your test cases is
depending on your relationship with
your customers is maybe they
can give it to you.
You know, if they have
a share full of, of
input, fi files have accumulated
take that and use that
that's going to be the
best kind of data you
could have, because it really
is customers from customers That
you had given an example
to me while we were
walking in the hall earlier
about a situation where you
had had some, some faults
that had occurred in some
software that you'd been involved
in, that was indicating there
was a problem. Basically something
went wrong and something went
fall, something phoned home, right?
So you went to the
code to find out what
was going on. Right? This
was an investigation of just
like I said, and an
investigation of what kind of
flaws were being discovered by
customers impacting them, that we
didn't discover and testing this
particular component was not well
tested internally. It had 50%
code coverage, which doesn't mean
it was 50% tested. It
means it was 50% untested.
So we would expect that
the problems would be lurking
in that untested code. And
I mean, isn't that what
you Expect that, that was
the thing that you said
earlier that really has changed.
My perspective is that code
coverage is an inverse number.
It's something that I want
to say. I know what's
well, actually that's funny. There
was a, there was a
movie with Hugh grant where
they had a, they had
a baby and he was
an unexpected baby. And he
said, well, you know, I
don't know what happened. The
protection I was using was
nine 99% effective. And the
answer was well, that makes
it 1% completely ineffective. Right?
Exactly. Yes. Well, personally I
expected to find the flaws
in the uncovered code because
we hadn't tested it at
all. Internally, at least not
formally with formal unit tests
that got measured by code
coverage. So in actual fact
that of the three parts
of the code that were
being hit by customers with
crashes causing a serious problem,
all three of them were
in the covered code in
the covered blocks. And so
now I think I have
an understanding about why that
would be that 50% that
was covered by tests was
the highway. It was the
highway through the code that
everybody hits naturally. That's where
the flaws were found that
were hit by customers. It
may very well be that
there were flaws in the
uncovered code that we didn't
cover in testing. And it,
as it turns out, that's
the same code that the
customers weren't running. And so
they weren't discovering those flaws.
What kind of metrics can
I apply? I mean, I
mean, it sounds like you
mean you've shaken my confidence
in code coverage as a
number that I can use
for, for confidence. I mean,
now it's just code coverage
has become just another data
point that I can use,
but what I feel like
I need another dimension. Yes.
Yes. Well, in a perfect
world, you would use state
coverage and state coverage is
all of the States that
my software can be in.
Unfortunately, state coverage is typically
infinite, but please don't despair
because I'm sorry, it's too
late. I've already begun to
despair. Sorry, Not all the
States are equally important, right?
So a state, again, the
States that the customers are
going to get the software
into are the most important
ones. I think that there
are efforts maybe in research
and other places where people
are trying to tackle this
problem, but practically speaking, you
know, in every day to
day life here, we have
to do something more practical.
And that what that really
comes down to is getting
feedback and iteration. So once
you have your high unit
tests coverage, and your code
coverage is high. So you
know that there's not much
code that you're never looking
at at all. That's a
good starting point. Then you
want to do samples or
customer oriented testing, stress testing,
especially with the functional testing,
a diversity of data, that's
likely to cover the things
that you haven't even thought
about with data generators or
data from customers or approaches
like that. Once you've done
that you should think to
yourself, well, at least I've
covered the basics. Now there's
some hope that this is
pretty good quality. That's where
you need feedback. And the
feedback is get people to
try. It is looking at
what is your bug find
rate from your internal deployment
or from manual testing. One
of the things that can
be very effective as directed
ad hoc testing, where you
take people and you say,
here's an area to look
at, just try it out
as if you were a
customer and see what kinds
of things you run into.
And a lot of times
that will uncover things that
your test automation just never
even thinks about. We had
a podcast a couple of
times, a couple of episodes
ago, where we spoke with
Patty Del Deleu from Microsoft
research and his PEX project,
which uses a kind of
a, you know, some mathematical
modeling to, to look at
a method and say, here
is the domain in which
I want to explore. So
it takes code coverage, almost
like chess. You know, you
put your finger on the
chess piece and there's so
many moves that you could
make and humans can only
make so many moves, but
a computer can go farther
and farther and farther down
the decision tree. And, you
know, it's, hopefully we'll see
something like that soon from,
from Microsoft research, but they
know that's more of a
brute force way of trying
to, to stumble on these
kinds of issues where understanding
more of the behavior driven
aspects of things like behavior
driven design would be a
better way to find these,
these highways. Yes, that's very
interesting. And there's two big
kind of approaches you can
take there, essentially. This is
forms of model based testing.
And so I believe with
PEX, from what I understand,
it looks at your code
and in firs usage patterns
from the code in order
to drive test cases through
it. And that's very interesting.
It does suffer from the
flaw again, that if the
code itself is missing functionality
or is wrong, is inferences
will be based on what
has been written rather than
what was intended. So that
leads still could be a
very valuable way of getting
effective code coverage for your
breath testing, I believe. And,
and the other potential as
well, especially as we can
add more metadata about our
intentions, that, that, that a
tool like that could use
another approach is where you
have your code, but you
create a model completely separately,
which is based on my
way of saying, this is
what I intended now. Obviously
the model has to be
simpler than the code itself.
Otherwise you've just written the
program twice, right? Once in
a modeling language and once
in the actual implementation. So,
and, and I've, I have
seen this happen where people
have gone to the lengths
of trying to create a
model, which completely represented their
entire functionality of their software.
And that tends to not
be very successful, but where
I have seen tremendous success
with model based testing is
creating a model. This very
simple, because it's only focusing
on one aspect of the
functionality that's expected. And so,
for example, in a frame
and a framework, maybe the
object lifetime of your framework
objects, you know, if you
have a complicated rules around
when they can be destroyed,
when they can be cleaned
up and the relationship between
parent and child objects, you
can create a model just
around that and get a
lot of value without trying
to create something so complicated
that you can't even understand
the results of what is
creating. The thing that models
give you, which are really
great is they give you
a test Oracle, a test.
Oracle is the code that
knows when a test runs,
whether it's right or wrong,
the result that you got,
that's actually the hardest part
of creating any kind of
test writing code to execute
into your software, pretty straightforward,
right. But then, well, did
the test pass or fail
in the simplest naive case?
You say, well, it didn't
throw any exception. It must've
been what is my assertion?
Yes, exactly. One of the
things that a boss of
mine really drove into my
head a lot in my
last job was he said,
if the system gets in,
we're speaking about.net code here.
If the system gets into
a state that it shouldn't
be, this is not the
time to be throwing an
exception. He says, debug dot
assert. He says, stop panic,
freak out. He says, debug,
that assert is as like
the least, the least, the
most underused thing he could
think of in the framework,
because there's exceptional cases at
a time when a data
coming in should, should throw
an exception and you could
handle that and graciously. But
if there is a state
system can get in that,
it has absolutely no business
getting into like, this should
never happen. You know, it,
I know the guy who's
working with you on the
program knows it, but if
you don't say it to
the code, debugged out, assert
X is know if X
is never supposed to be
no, then do that. And
this says nothing will make
someone fix a bug like
a big debug assert in
the middle of a, the
running of an application. Well,
That's a fact. Absolutely. Now
it's interesting. It seems to
me, I'm trying to put
this in the context of
maybe a smaller ISV or
maybe some of our listeners
may have small kind of
two pizza teams, a smaller
teams. I like to say
two pizza teams. That's what
Amazon says. The size of
a project should always be
the number of people that
you could feed comfortably with
two pizzas. Sounds reasonable, anything
bigger. It's unruly that the
best way for a smaller
organization to get this data
is to instrument their code,
to phone, home, to quote
unquote, phone home, like a
tool like, like smart assembly.
Microsoft has dr. Watson, can
we plug, can I make
my code instrumented with Watson?
Can you make your code
instrumented with Watson? I'm not
a hundred percent sure on
that myself. I do know
that you, it is possible
from Microsoft to get that
data on your products. So
if you're blowing up majorly
and you hit send information,
that's being held out there,
I'll have to dig those
people down and find out
how I can find out
if my applications are sending
those. But I'm always impressed
with applications and smart assembly
is the product that comes
to mind, which is a,
you know, an an, an,
a, an aspect oriented thing
that weaves into your assembly
after the fact. And when
an exception occurs, we'll phone,
home, and speak to a,
what will speak to an
end point? I think that's
an excellent idea because despite
our best efforts, it may
be that where we thought
the highway was and where
it actually is. Aren't the
same. And phoning home is
the way that we're going
to be able to discover
that Well, cause ultimately what,
what happens in reality, no
matter how lofty your ideas
were, no matter how much
planning and putting into the
model, you may think they
use it this way, but
the fact is they do
use it that way. Right?
Exactly. I guess one other
thing I would want to
say is that these days
there's a lot of focus
and effort on automated testing
and automation. And the thing
that I really noticed about
that is that is really
a trade off. And it's
not always the right thing
to automate all of your
tests, because what happens if
you focus on a hundred
percent test automation is you
just don't write the tests
that are too hard to
automate. And then very important
things don't get covered. This,
this is the reality of
what happens. So an example
is of things that are
extremely hard to automate are
what does your test measure
when it's running? If your,
if your product has a
user interface and the user
interacts with it, maybe you
use UI automation to press
some buttons. Of course, that's
a high cost to maintain
kind of a of test
drive it, and also to
keep it working as the
UI changes. But let's say
you've done that what the
test doesn't know is it
doesn't see that the color
is strange or that the
screen flickers, or maybe you
have timing to make sure
that when you click the
button, something reasonable happens within
30 seconds. But maybe the
fact that it's taking one
second to the user, it
makes the application feel like
it's sluggish. So that is
a flaws in those kinds
of automation that makes their
value less, not zero value,
but just less. And the
cost high because of the
continual changing you have to
do. On the other hand,
especially when the UI is
under frequent change, suppose you
have a manual test. Well,
the problem is, is boring
to do a manual testing.
Well, for a lot of
people is boring, but there
are people actually who do
enjoy that. And so it
would be interesting to find
some of them and see
if they would like to
help you out. But in
any case, if you're going
to do this yourself, you're
two piece of team. You're
not going to pick someone
else up. You don't have
to do it a lot.
If everybody sat down for
30 minutes at the end
of the weekend and went
and went through it, that
would be quite satisfactory to
catch these kinds of issues.
Most likely, You know, for
applications that have a user
interface. One of the neat
ideas that I saw when
office 2007 was being worked
on was this little smiley
face that would sit on
the dialogue box. It was
a happy face and a
sad face. And if you
saw something that you liked,
you click the happy face
and it would take a
screenshot and allow you to
annotate it and then send
it directly to the team.
And we actually wrote a
little thing up and a
number of people made libraries
for wind forms that you
can just add in. And
then while you're in your
testing phase, someone can go
at any point in any
dialogue and say, I like
this, or I don't like
this, and it'll do a
screenshot. And then you get
all this fantastic data going
directly into your bug database
with pictures of real people's
screens, doing whatever it was
or was not supposed to
do. And you get both
negative and positive feedback because
it's presented in such a
pleasant way, just simply a
button in the title bar
with a happy face or
sad face. Everyone understood it.
And everyone's excited to give,
give that feedback. And that's
another way to collect data
that I'm starting to realize
there's more and more important.
Absolutely. I think that's a
really interesting idea now, suppose
you've clicked that a frowny
face a few times and
some of us, some others.
And so the in development,
the product now has changed.
And that interface changes if
you're using a low cost
script with manual testing, to
keep that area covered. When
a human comes to that
and sees the difference, they're
not going to fall over
and say, test pass failed,
go spend half an hour
investigating to try and find
out why this test case
failed and then fix it.
They'll just go right past.
That's where the efficiency comes
from. Now, of course, once
you've shipped and you're in
maintenance mode, it may make
a lot of sense to
do UI automation in order
to catch, especially Because you're
not going to look at
it frequently. And when the
occasional bug fix comes in.
So the point there is
that automation is not a
panacea. You should try and
make that trade off is
the time that I invest
in creating this automation, don't
forget to count the maintenance
cost. I'm going to give
me a return versus the
doing the manual testing at
this point in my project
versus another project. So I
am very happy about all
the automation people are doing,
but sometimes I worry that
people get carried away too
far. Yeah. Yeah. When I
think you bring up a
really important point about progression
testing, one just can't remind
oneself too much about how
important it is when a
bug comes in to write
a test that causes that
bug to happen, and then
watch it fail. I have
to say, I understand why
the spike happened and then
to fix it. That is,
I mean, red green unit
testing is important, but it's
so much more important within
the context of regression. Cause
there have been a million
times where I fixed something,
thought it was great, but
just didn't back it up
again. This is the notion
of making an assertion in
your head versus backing it
up with an assertion in
the code. So important. Absolutely.
Well, I really appreciate you
taking the time to sit
down with me today. This
has been really interesting. And
this has been another episode
of Hansel minutes. We'll see
you again next week.